sidrops-charter-02.md, before:

## SIDROps Charter

The global deployment of SIDR, consisting of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), Origin Validation of
BGP announcements, and BGPsec, is still underway, creating an Internet
Routing System consisting of SIDR-aware and non-SIDR-aware networks.
This deployment must be properly handled to avoid the division of
the Internet into separate networks.  SIDR Operations Working Group (SIDROPS) is responsible for
encouraging deployment of the SIDR technologies while ensuring as secure
of a global routing system, as possible, during the transition.

The SIDROPS WG is focused on deployment and operational
issues, their mitigations, and experiences  with SIDR technologies that are part of the
global routing system, as well as the repositories and CA systems that
form part of the SIDR architecture.

SIDROPS develops guidelines for
the operation of SIDR-aware networks and provides operational guidance
on how to deploy and operate SIDR technologies in existing and new
networks. It also develops protocol and protocols extensions to improve operational efficiency and security of SIDR such as Autonomous System Provider Authorization (ASPA) and reliable cache synchronization mechanims. The WG is also
responsible for the maintenance of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) to Router protocol.

In the space of SIDROPS, the term operators will encompass a range
of operational experience: CA Operators, Regional/National and Local
Internet Registries, Relying Party software developers as well as the
research/measurement community all have relevant operational experience
or insight that this working group will consider in its work.

The goals of SIDROPS are to:

* Solicit input from a range of operators to identify operational issues with a SIDR-aware Internet, and determine solutions or workarounds to those issues.

* Solicit input from all operators to identify issues with interaction with the non-SIDR-aware Internet, and to determine solutions or workarounds to those issues.

* Standardize YANG data models related to the SIDR operations.

* Develop operational solutions for identified issues in SIDROPS and document them in Standard Track, Informational, or BCP documents, depending on the type of solution (e.g., new extensions vs. operational/deployment recommendations).

* Document common SIDROPS terminology as Informational RFC.

BGPSEC (RFC 8205) maintenance and extensions belong to IDR WG. SIDROPS may provide input to IDR, as needed, and will cooperate with that WG in reviewing solutions to BGPSEC operational and deployment problems. Documenting the operational aspects of securing the Internet routing system other than SIDR belongs to GROW WG.

## Milestones

| Date | Milestone |
| --- | --- | 
| Nov 2025 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-8210bis to the IESG for publication|
| Nov 2025 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-profile to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-verification to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-notation to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-slurm to the IESG for publication|

Commit message:

Add requirement for interoperable implementations
Emphasize the requirement for two interoperable implementations before submitting protocol specifications to IESG.

sidrops-charter-02.md, after:

## SIDROps Charter

The global deployment of SIDR, consisting of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), Origin Validation of
BGP announcements, and BGPsec, is still underway, creating an Internet
Routing System consisting of SIDR-aware and non-SIDR-aware networks.
This deployment must be properly handled to avoid the division of
the Internet into separate networks.  SIDR Operations Working Group (SIDROPS) is responsible for
encouraging deployment of the SIDR technologies while ensuring as secure
of a global routing system, as possible, during the transition.

The SIDROPS WG is focused on deployment and operational
issues, their mitigations, and experiences  with SIDR technologies that are part of the
global routing system, as well as the repositories and CA systems that
form part of the SIDR architecture.

SIDROPS develops guidelines for
the operation of SIDR-aware networks and provides operational guidance
on how to deploy and operate SIDR technologies in existing and new
networks. It also develops protocol and protocols extensions to improve operational efficiency and security of SIDR such as Autonomous System Provider Authorization (ASPA) and reliable cache synchronization mechanims. The WG is also
responsible for the maintenance of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) to Router protocol.

In the space of SIDROPS, the term operators will encompass a range
of operational experience: CA Operators, Regional/National and Local
Internet Registries, Relying Party software developers as well as the
research/measurement community all have relevant operational experience
or insight that this working group will consider in its work.

The goals of SIDROPS are to:

* Solicit input from a range of operators to identify operational issues with a SIDR-aware Internet, and determine solutions or workarounds to those issues.

* Solicit input from all operators to identify issues with interaction with the non-SIDR-aware Internet, and to determine solutions or workarounds to those issues.

* Standardize YANG data models related to the SIDR operations.

* Develop operational solutions for identified issues in SIDROPS and document them in Standard Track, Informational, or BCP documents, depending on the type of solution (e.g., new extensions vs. operational/deployment recommendations).

* Document common SIDROPS terminology as Informational RFC.

Given the importance of routing security to the overall stability of the Internet, the Working Group will not submit protocol specifications for publication to the	IESG before demonstrating at least two interoperable implementations.
See RFC 5657 (part of BCP 9) for guidance on what implementation reports should contain and BCP 205 for guidance on how to raise awareness of running code.

BGPSEC (RFC 8205) maintenance and extensions belong to IDR WG. SIDROPS may provide input to IDR, as needed, and will cooperate with that WG in reviewing solutions to BGPSEC operational and deployment problems. Documenting the operational aspects of securing the Internet routing system other than SIDR belongs to GROW WG.

## Milestones

| Date | Milestone |
| --- | --- | 
| Nov 2025 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-8210bis to the IESG for publication|
| Nov 2025 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-profile to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-verification to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-notation to the IESG for publication|
| Mar 2026 | Submit draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-slurm to the IESG for publication|
